
Class 6 
DN 2.9 bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi, bhikkhavo’ti. 

The Blessed One addressed the monks, “O monks!”
 
MN 2.2	bhikkhave, assutavā puthujjano na parimuccati jātiyā 
Monks, an unlearned common person is not liberated from birth.
 
DN 11.6 esa bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho 
This community of the Blessed One’s disciples is worthy of offerings.
 
DN 16.7 atha kho āyasmato ānandassa etad’ahosi

 Then, this [thought] occurred to Venerable Ananda

 
VIN 1.2.12 “mā maṃ āyasmanto kiñci avacuttha kalyāṇaṃ vā pāpakaṃ vā”
Venerables, don’t say anything to me, good or bad!
 
MN 152	(simpl) satthārā karaṇīyaṃ sāvakānaṃ, kataṃ vo taṃ mayā. 
What should be done by a teacher for (his) disciples, that has been done by me for you. 
 
SNP 9	ye keci pāṇabhūtā atthi, tasā vā thāvarā vā anavasesā
Whatever living beings there are, whether moving or not moving without exception.
 
DN 16.26 (simpl) dve kassakā bhātaro hatā, cattāro ca balibaddā
Two farmers, [who are] brothers, and four oxen were killed.
 
SN 1.47	(simpl) ye dadanti upassayaṃ, tesaṃ divā ca ratto ca, sadā puññaṃ pavaḍḍhati
Whoever gives a dwelling, merit increases for them all the time, day and night.
 
AN 8.20 bhagavā tuṇhī ahosi.

The Blessed One was silent.
 

1.	therā rattaññū ciraṃ pabbajitā saṅghassa pitaro saṅghassa pariṇāyakā AN 7.23 (simpl)
Senior monks of long-standing, [who] have been ordained for a long time, are fathers of the community of monks, guides of the community of monks.
2.	bhikkhū there sakkarissanti garuṃ karissanti mānessanti pūjessanti  AN 7.23 (simpl)
Monks will honor, respect, revere, [and] venerate the elders.
3.	mātāpitu upaṭṭhānaṃ, puttassa ca dārassa saṅgaho SNP 16 
The looking after mother and father, the support of the wife and son.
4.	sabbe dhammā anattā iti, yadā paññāya passati, atha nibbindati dukkhe – esa maggo visuddhiyā DHP 277
“All things are non-self.” When one sees [this] with wisdom, then one is disenchanted with suffering. This is the path for purification.
5.	taco ca nahāru ca aṭṭhi ca avasissatu, sarīre upasussatu maṃsalohitaṃ SN 12.22 
Let [my] skin, sinew, and bone remain, let [my] flesh and blood dry up in [my] body.
6.	sukhassa dātā medhāvī sukhaṃ so adhigacchati AN 5.37
The intelligent man [who is] a giver of happiness, acquires happiness.
7.	tena mahāsenena maccunā saṅgaro na hoti MN 131 (simpl)
There is no bargaining with that death, with (his) great army. 
8.	ehi tvaṃ bhikkhu bhojane mattaññū hohi MN 107
Come, monk, be moderate with regard to food!
9.	bhikkhū hirimanto bhavissanti, ottappino bhavissanti, satimanto bhavissanti, paññavanto bhavissanti AN 7.25 (simpl)
Monks should be conscientious, they should be feeling shame, they should be mindful, they should be wise.
10.	sukhino vā khemino hontu sabbe sattā bhavantu sukhit'attā SNP 8
May all living beings be safe or at ease, may they be happy.
11.	ime bhikkhave dhammā sekhassa bhikkhuno aparihānāya saṃvattanti. AN 8.79
These things, o monks, are conducive for the non-decline of a monk who is a trainee. 
12.	ajja eva ātappaṃ karohi, ko jānāti maraṇaṃ suve MN 131 (simpl)
Just make an effort today; who knows [if] death [is] tomorrow?
13.	sattā tamhā kāyā cutā āgāmino honti āgantāro itthattaṃ AN 4.171
Living beings [who] have passed away from that group are returners, who come back to this existence.
14.	mādisaṃ sīlavantaṃ kalyāṇadhammaṃ brahmacāriṃ paricara VIN PAT SA 4 simpl
You must minister to one like me, observing the moral practices, of upright nature, one living the holy life.
15.	ce so bhikkhu, pubbe appavārito, upasaṅkamissati cīvare vikappaṃ āpajjissati VIN PAT NP 8 simpl
If that monk, previously uninvited, approaches [there], causes an alteration in a robe…
16.	yaṃ kho, bhante, āyasmā veyyāvaccakaraṃ niddisi, saññatto so mayā, upasaṅkamatu āyasmā kālena, cīvarena taṃ acchādessati VIN PAT NP 10
Indeed, venerable sir, the steward whom the venerable one has indicated has been instructed by me; let the venerable one approach him at a suitable time; he will clothe you with a robe.
17.	bhikkhu mātugāmassa uttarichappañcavācāhi dhammaṃ deseti, aññatra viññunā purisaviggahena, pācittiyaṃ.	VIN PAT PC 7
[If any] monk expounds Dhamma to a woman by means of more than five or six sentences, except [together] with a knowledgeable male, [it is] an offence requiring confession.
18.	na bāhuṃ pacālakaṃ antaraghare nisīdissāmi	VIN PAT SK 18 (simpl)
I will not sit in an inhabited area swinging [my] arm[s].
19.	nidhīnaṃ va pavattāraṃ, vajjadassinaṃ  niggayhavādiṃ medhāviṃ paṇḍitaṃ bhajāhi DHP 76 (simpl)
Associate with an intelligent person, a wise man, one who reproves, who sees fault, he is (like) one who points out the treasure.
20.	mātari pitari ca, atho jeṭṭhamhi bhātari. ācariye ca, tesu na mānaṃ karohi. SN 7.15 (simpl)
Towards mother and father, and after that, towards the eldest brother; and towards the teacher. Do not show conceit towards them.
21.	sabbābhibhuṃ sabbaviduṃ sumedhaṃ, tam naraṃ ekavihārī iti ahaṃ brūmi SN 21.10 (simpl)
[One who is] all-conquering, all-knowing, wise, that man I call thus, “one who dwells alone.” 
 

1.	SN 1.1 sā devatā bhagavantaṃ etad’avoca
The deity said this to the Blessed One.
2.	DN 3.15 cakkhumanto rūpāni dakkhanti
A person with sight sees forms.
3.	MN 152 seyyathāpi balavā puriso samiñjitaṃ vā bāhaṃ pasāreyya
Just like a strong man would stretch out (his) bent arm or …
4.	AN 2.40 yasmiṃ, bhikkhave, samaye corā balavanto honti..
At whichever time, monks, thieves are powerful…
5.	DN 22.18 upekkhako satimā sukhavihārī’ti
“He who is equanimous [and] mindful lives at ease.”
6.	AN 5.81 thero bhikkhu sabrahmacārīnaṃ piyo ca hoti manāpo ca garu ca bhāvanīyo ca.
An elder monk is dear to [his] fellow monks and pleasant, respected, and worthy of esteem [by them].
7.	MN 147	taṃ kiṃ maññasi, rāhula, cakkhu niccaṃ vā aniccaṃ vā'ti
What do you think, Rāhula, “Is the eye permanent or impermanent?”
8.	MN 118 bhikkhu araññagato vā rukkhamūlagato vā suññāgāragato vā nisīdati.
A monk, gone to the forest or to the foot of a tree or to an empty dwelling, sits down.
 

