
Class 11 

SN 22.43 attadīpā, bhikkhave, viharatha attasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā, dhammadīpā dhammasaraṇā anaññasaraṇā.
you should stay independent, with one's own refuge, does not depend on another, with Dhamma as one’s solid ground, taking refuge in the Dhamma, does not depend on another.


 
VIN 0 taṃ bhavantaṃ gotamaṃ evaṃ kalyāṇo kittisaddo abbhuggato
A good reputation has spread about Venerable Gotama in this way.

 
UD 73  atthi bhikkhave ajātaṃ abhūtaṃ akataṃ asaṅkhataṃ
Monks, there is [something] not born, not become, not made, not constructed/unconditioned.
AN 8.74	seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, ādittasīso vā ādittasīso vā
Monks, just as [a man whose] clothes were on fire or [whose] head was burning… 

ITI 111 āraddhaṃ hoti vīriyaṃ asallīnaṃ, upaṭṭhitā sati asammuṭṭhā, passaddho kāyo asāraddho, samāhitaṃ cittaṃ ekaggaṃ
Energy is aroused and active.
Mindfulness is present and not forgotten
The body is calm and not excited.
The mind is composed and unified.
 
MN 107	 asite pīte khāyite sāyite sampajānakārī
[He is] cultivating attention to eating, drinking, chewing and tasting.
 
MN 39	 seyyathā’pi puriso ābādhiko assa dukkhito bāḷhagilāno
imagine if a person would be ill, miserable, very sick.
 
AN 2.135	bālo abyatto asappuriso khataṃ upahataṃ attānaṃ pariharati
The foolish, uneducated, wicked man maintains himself injured and damaged. 
AN 5.114	ye te, ānanda, bhikkhū navā acirapabbajitā adhun’āgatā imaṃ dhammavinayaṃ
Ananda, those monks who [are] recently ordained, [who] recently come to this teaching and discipline.
 
MN 152	upekkhako tattha viharati sato sampajāno
He remains there, equanimous, mindful and attentive. 
 
SNP 9	sakko ujū ca suhujū ca suvaco cassa mudu anatimānī
He should be able, straight, upright, meek, gentle and not arrogant.
SN 12.66 samaṇā vā brāhmaṇā vā yaṃ loke piyarūpaṃ sātarūpaṃ taṃ aniccato dakkhissanti dukkhato dakkhissanti anattato dakkhissanti rogato dakkhissanti bhayato dakkhissanti, te taṇhaṃ pajahissanti.
Ascetics or priests
Whatever in the world is agreeable and pleasant
they will see that as impermanent, as painful, as not-self, as a disease, as fearful
they will abandon craving.



1.	mettāya cetovimuttiyā āsevitāya bhāvitāya bahulīkatāya yānīkatāya vatthukatāya anuṭṭhitāya paricitāya susamāraddhāya ekādasa ānisaṃsā pāṭikaṅkhā. 
AN 11.15 simpl
When the liberation of mind by means of goodwill has been practiced persistently, developed, made much of, mastered, made a basis, established, familiarized and energetically undertaken,
eleven benefits are to be expected.	
2.	ariyasāvako uṭṭhānavīriyena adhigatehi bhogehi bāhābalena paricitehi seda-avakkhittehi dhammikehi dhammena laddhehi imāni cattāri pattakammāni kattā hoti. 
AN 4.61(simpl)
The noble disciple, [who] by means of wealth acquired by effort and exertion, completely accumulated by manual labor and by [much] sweat shed, righteous [wealth] obtained by righteous means,
is one who does these four worthy deeds.	
3.	yāni tāni sīlāni akhaṇḍāni acchiddāni asabalāni akammāsāni bhujissāni viññūhi pasatthāni aparāmaṭṭhāni samādhino saṃvattanikāni 
MN 48 simpl
Whichever [of] those virtues, which are unbroken, without cracks, not mottled, unblemished, liberating, commended by wise persons, irreproachable and conducive for stability of mind…
4.	rūpaṃ atīt'ānāgatapaccuppannaṃ ajjhattaṃ vā bahiddhā vā oḷārikaṃ vā sukhumaṃ vā hīnaṃ vā paṇītaṃ vā yaṃ dūre santike vā sabbaṃ rūpaṃ SN 22.59
Materiality in the past, present, and future, internally or externally, coarse or fine, low or superior, [that] which [is] near or far away – all materiality ...
5.	yad eva tattha hoti rūpagataṃ vedanāgataṃ saññāgataṃ saṅkhāragataṃ viññāṇagataṃ, te dhamme aniccato dukkhato rogato gaṇḍato sallato aghato ābādhato parato palokato suññato anattato samanupassati. MN 64
Whatever in that regard there is connected with materiality, connected with feeling, connected with perception, connected with volitional formations, connected with consciousness,
he sees those states as impermanent, as suffering, as illness, as a boil, as a dagger, as pain, as alien, as disintegrating, as empty, as not oneself.
6.	sāraṃ ca sārato ñatvā, asāraṃ ca asārato, te sāraṃ adhigacchanti, sammāsaṅkappe gocarā. DHP 012 simpl
Having known the essential as essential and the inessential as inessential, they attain the essence — [their] domain [is] in right intention. 
7.	% satthā ca me lokaṃ imaṃ adhiṭṭhahi, 
aniccato addhuvato asārato, 
pakkhanda maṃ citta jinassa sāsane, 
tārehi oghā mahatā suduttarā. TH 262 
And the teacher determined this world for me as impermanent, unstable, and insubstantial.
O mind, make me leap forth into the teachings of the conqueror; save me from the great torrent, extremely difficult to cross.
8.	idha, gahapati, assutavā puthujjano ariyānaṃ adassāvī ariyadhammassa akovido ariyadhamme avinīto sappurisānaṃ adassāvī sappurisadhammassa akovido sappurisadhamme avinīto rūpaṃ attato samanupassati SN 22.1
In this regard, householder, an uninstructed ordinary person who has no regard for noble persons, [who is] not proficient in the noble teaching, [who is] uneducated about the noble teaching,
who has no regard for righteous men, [who is] not proficient in the teaching of righteous men, [who is] uneducated about the teaching of righteous men, regards form as self.
9.	cakkhuviññeyyānaṃ rūpānaṃ iṭṭhānaṃ kantānaṃ manāpānaṃ manoramānaṃ lok’āmisena paṭisaṃyuttānaṃ paṭilābhaṃ paṭilābhato samanupassato …	 MN 137
For one perceiving acquisition as a personal acquisition of forms perceivable by the eye, related to worldly pleasure, wished for, desirable, pleasant, [and] delightful …
10.	% attani ca, bhikkhave, attaniye ca saccato thetato anupalabbhamāne, yam'pi taṃ diṭṭhiṭṭhānaṃ, — so loko so attā, so pecca bhavissāmi nicco dhuvo sassato avipariṇāmadhammo, sassatisamaṃ tath'eva ṭhassāmī'ti, — nanu ayaṃ, bhikkhave, kevalo paripūro bāladhammo'ti? MN 22
“Monks, since oneself and what belongs to oneself is not being found as true and reliable,
[then] the ground for views, [namely,] ‘that which the world [is] the self (world = self); after death I will be permanent, enduring, eternal; with an unchanging nature I will remain in the same way for ever and ever’ –
wouldn’t this, monks, [be] a totally complete doctrine of fools?” 
11.	svākkhāto bhagavatā dhammo sandiṭṭhiko akāliko ehipassiko opanayiko paccattaṃ veditabbo viññūhi SN 11.3
The teaching by the Blessed One [is] well taught, directly visible, timeless, inviting one to come and see, practical, [and is] to be understood individually by wise persons.
12.	ye ca atītā sambuddhā, ye ca buddhā anāgatā.  
yo ca eta’r’ahi sambuddho, bahunnaṃ sokanāsano. SN 6.2
The Awakened Ones who are past, and the Buddhas not yet come and the present Awakened One [are] dispeller[s] of sorrow for many.
13.	ye ca kho sammā-akkhāte dhamme dhammaṃ anuvattino,  te janā pāraṃ essanti, maccuno dheyyaṃ suduttaraṃ.
DHP 086 simpl 
Indeed, whoever acting according to the teaching in the perfectly declared teaching, those people will go to the far shore; the realm of death, extremely difficult to cross.
14.	evam’eva kho bhikkhu santuṭṭho hoti kāyaṃ parihārikena cīvarena kucchiṃ parihārikena piṇḍapātena. MN 51 simpl
In the same way, a monk is content with sustaining [his] body with [his] robe, [and] with looking after [his] stomach with alms food.
15.	evaṃ samāhite citte parisuddhe pariyodāte anaṅgaṇe vigat’ūpakkilese mudubhūte kammaniye ṭhite āneñjappatte pubbenivās'ānussatiñāṇāya cittaṃ abhininnāmeti. MN 39
When [his] mind is thus collected, [when it] has become pure, bright, spotless, without defilement, pliable workable, stabilized, [and] imperturbable,
he inclines [his] mind for the knowledge from the recollection of previous lives.
16.	nibbindaṃ virajjati; virāgā vimuccati. vimuttasmiṃ vimuttam’iti ñāṇaṃ hoti. 'khīṇā jāti vusitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ SN 22.59
Being disenchanted, he becomes dispassionate. On account of the dispassion, he is released. When liberated, there is the knowledge, “[the mind is] liberated.”
[He understands:] “Birth is exhausted, the holy life is completed…”
17.	phuṭṭhassa lokadhammehi, cittaṃ yassa na kampati. asokaṃ virajaṃ khemaṃ, etaṃ maṅgalam’uttamaṃ. SNP 16
A mind of [a person] who, touched by worldly matters, is not disturbed, [but rather] free from sadness, untainted, at peace – this [is] the ultimate blessing.
18.	tassa me, bhante, bhagavā accayaṃ accayato paṭiggaṇhātu, āyatiṃ saṁvarāya SN 12.70
Therefore, Venerable Sir, may the Blessed One accept my fault as fault, for the sake of [my] restraint in the future.




1.	atthi dinnaṃ atthi yiṭṭhaṃ atthi hutaṃ MN 41
There is what is given, there is what is sacrificed, there is what is offered
2.	seyyathā’pi suddhaṃ vatthaṃ apagataṃ kāḷakā … DN 14.14
Just as clean cloth free from stain…
