

Class 9 


VIN 0	āraddhaṃ kho pana me, brāhmaṇa, vīriyaṃ ahosi.
Effort was truly aroused by me, Brahman.

 
MN 9	dūrato mayaṃ āgaccheyyāma āyasmato sāriputtassa santike etassa bhāsitassa atthaṃ aññātuṃ
We would come from far away
in the presence of Ven. Sāriputta
To learn the meaning of this saying. 
 
SN 12.61 assutavā puthujjano n’ālaṃ nibbindituṃ n’ālaṃ virajjituṃ n’ālaṃ vimuccituṃ
An uneducated common person [is] not able to become disenchanted, [is] not able to become dispassionate, [is] not able to become free.
 
AN 3.112 tīṇi imāni, bhikkhave, nidānāni kammānaṃ samudayāya. katamāni tīṇi? 
Monks, [there are] these three origins for the arising of kamma. 
SN 22.59 yaṃ aniccaṃ dukkhaṃ vipariṇāmadhammaṃ, kallaṃ taṃ samanupassituṃ, etaṃ mama, esohamasmi, eso me attā’ti? 
Whatever is impermanent, unsatisfactory, subject to change
Is it suitable to regard that [as]:
“this is mine, this is me, this is my self”?

 
AN 4.42	cattāri imāni, bhikkhave, pañha-vyākaraṇāni . katamāni cattāri?
Monks, [there are] these four [ways] [of] answering questions. What four?
AN 3.66 alaṃ hi vo, kālāmā, kaṅkhituṃ alaṃ vicikicchituṃ
It is definitely suitable for you, Kalamas, to doubt, it is suitable to be unsure. 
 
MN 13 atha kho tesaṃ bhikkhūnaṃ etadahosi, atippago sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya carituṃ, yaṃ nūna mayaṃ yena paribbājakānaṃ ārāmo tena upasaṅkameyyāmā'ti 
And then, this [thought] occurred to those monks
It’s too early to walk for alms in Sāvatthi
Let us approach the park of the wandering ascetics.
 
MN 39	 seyyathāpi bhikkhave puriso odātena vatthena sasīsaṃ pārupetvā nisinno assa
Imagine if, monks, a man would be seated, covered with a white cloth up to the head. 
 



1.	aṇumattesu vajjesu bhayaṃ dassāvī, samādāya sikkhāhi sikkhāpadesu MN 107 simpl
Seeing fear with regard to the slightest fault, train yourself [by] undertaking the training precepts.
2.	ahesumha nu kho mayaṃ atītam'addhānaṃ, nanu kho ahesumha atītam'addhānaṃ, kiṃ nu kho ahesumha atītam'addhānaṃ? MN 38
Were we in the past? Were we not in the past? What indeed were we in the past?
3.	taṃ assa bahujanahitāya bahujanasukhāya lok’ānukampāya atthāya hitāya sukhāya devamanussānaṃ DN 16.21
That would be for the benefit [and] the happiness of many people, out of compassion for the world, [it would be] for the benefit, advantage and comfort of gods and humans.
4.	mattaññutā ca bhattasmiṃ, pantaṃ ca sayan’āsanaṃ,  adhicitte ca āyogo, etaṃ buddhānaṃ sāsanaṃ. DHP 185
Moderation in regard to food, a secluded living place [i.e. living in seclusion], and devotion to mental development; this is the teaching of the Buddhas.
5.	tasmā hi paññā eva dhanena seyyā, yāya vosānaṃ idha adhigacchati.  abyositattā hi bhav’ābhavesu, pāpāni kammāni karoti mohā.  TH 251
Therefore, only wisdom is indeed better than wealth; by it [i.e. wisdom] one attains perfection here/in this world; indeed, because of not being accomplished, out of delusion, one does evil actions in any states of existence.
6.	jīvitānaṃ parikkhāre, bhesajje atha paccaye, na bāḷhaṃ ussukā āsuṃ. TH 257
They were not overly zealously desiring medicines and requisites for life.
7.	appassuto puriso, balibaddho va jīrati,  maṃsāni tassa vaḍḍhanti, paññā tassa na vaḍḍhati. DHP 152 simpl
An unlearned man ages like an ox, his flesh increases, his wisdom does not increase.
8.	sakkā nu kho, bho gotama, imasmiṃ dhammavinaye evam’eva anupubbasikkhā anupubbakiriyā anupubbapaṭipadā paññapetuṃ? MN 107
Master Gotama, is it possible, similarly, to describe gradual training, gradual undertaking, gradual progress in this Doctrine-and-Discipline?
9.	seyyathidaṃ — cattāro satipaṭṭhānā cattāro sammappadhānā cattāro iddhipādā pañc’indriyāni pañca balāni satta bojjh'aṅgā ariyo aṭṭh’aṅgiko maggo. DN 16.21
[They are] as follows: four foundations of mindfulness, four right efforts, four bases for psychic power, five faculties, five mental powers, seven enlightenment factors [and] the Noble Eightfold Path.
10.	jarā jīraṇatā khaṇḍiccaṃ pāliccaṃ valittacatā āyuno saṃhāni indriyānaṃ paripāko; ayaṃ vuccati jarā. SN 12.2
Ageing, decrepitude, brokenness, grayness of hair, wrinkled skin, dwindling of the life force, deterioration of the sense faculties; this is called old age.
11.	ghānasmiṃ api nibbindati gandhesu api nibbindati ghānaviññāṇe api nibbindati ghānasamphasse api nibbindati SN 35.28
He is disenchanted with regard to the nose, also with regard to smell, he is disenchanted with regard to nose consciousness as well, he is even disenchanted with regard to nose contact.
12.	% sārambhe ce bhikkhu vatthusmiṃ aparikkamane saññācikāya kuṭiṃ kāreyya bhikkhū vā anabhineyya vatthuṃ desanāya pamāṇaṃ vā atikkāmeyya, saṅghādiseso. VIN PAT SA 6
If a monk by his own begging should build a hut on a site entailing harm to creatures and not accessible (i.e. not having a surrounding space), or [if] he should not invite monks for allocating a place, or [if] he should exceed the measurement, it is an offence requiring suspension.
13.	% tattha sā dakkhā hoti analasā tatr'upāyāya vīmaṃsāya samannāgatā alaṃ kātuṃ alaṃ saṃvidhātuṃ. AN 8.49 simpl
There, she is skilled and energetic, endowed with relevant discrimination [and] is able to organize and do [the domestic chores for her husband].
14.	$ jegucchī hoti uccāraṃ vā passāvaṃ vā abhinisīdituṃ vā abhinipajjituṃ vā. AN 8.13 
He is one who hates to sit or lie down on excrement or urine.
15.	na sukaraṃ agāraṃ ajjhāvasatā ek’antaparipuṇṇaṃ ek’antaparisuddhaṃ saṅkhalikhitaṃ brahmacariyaṃ carituṃ. MN 27
It is not easy [for] one domestically settled at home to live the completely perfect, completely pure holy life, polished like mother-of-pearl.
16.	 bhagavā pana, bhante, arahaṃ sammāsambuddho pahoti tathā kātuṃ yathā sabbo loko kāyassa bhedā paraṃ maraṇā sugatiṃ saggaṃ lokaṃ upapajjeyya? SN 42.6
But, venerable sir, the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the Perfectly Enlightened One is able to make all the world thus, so that after the breaking up of the body, after death, that it might be reborn in a good destination, a heavenly world.
17.	% evam'eva kho ahaṃ, bhante, imesaṃ ekādasannaṃ amatadvārānaṃ ekam'ekena api amatadvārena sakkuṇissāmi attānaṃ sotthiṃ kātuṃ. MN 52
Indeed, in the same way [as the man fleeing from a fire in a house with eleven doors], I, too, by myself will be able to safely flee [lit: do] through any of the eleven doors to the deathless state
18.	yaṃ, bhikkhave, na tumhākaṃ, taṃ pajahatha. taṃ vo pahīnaṃ hitāya sukhāya bhavissati. kiñ’ca, bhikkhave, na tumhākaṃ? SN 22.33
Whatever is not yours, monks, abandon that; [when] that has been abandoned by you, it will be for [your] benefit and happiness. And what, monks, is not yours?
19.	eko ahaṃ sakka mahantaṃ oghaṃ, anissito no visahāmi tārituṃ	 SNP 61
Sakyan, alone and independent, I am unable to cross over the great flood.
20.	‘ahaṃ nu kho asmi? no nu kho asmi? kiṃ nu kho asmi? kathaṃ nu kho asmi? ayaṃ nu kho satto kuto āgato? so kuhiṃ gāmī bhavissati iti? MN 2.2
“Am I? Am I not? What am I? How am I? From where has this living being come? Where will he be heading?”
21.	atha puriso āgaccheyya jīvitu'kāmo amaritu'kāmo sukhakāmo dukkhappaṭikūlo SN 12.63
Then a man would come along, wishing to live, not wishing to die, wishing for ease, averse to suffering.
22.	taṃ kiṃ maññasi, brāhmaṇa, idha puriso āgaccheyya rājagahaṃ gantu'kāmo. so taṃ upasaṅkamitvā evaṃ vadeyya, "icchāmi ahaṃ, bhante, rājagahaṃ gantuṃ, tassa me rājagahassa maggaṃ upadisā'ti. MN 107
What do you think [about] this, brahmin; here, a man would come along wishing to go to Rājagaha. Having approached you, he would say, “Venerable sir, I wish to go to Rājagaha. Point out the way to Rājagaha to me.”
23.	yasmā ca kho, bhikkhave, rūpaṃ anattā, tasmā rūpaṃ ābādhāya saṃvattati SN 22.59
Because form is indeed not self; therefore it is leading to illness.
24.	yesu idha n'atthi paramaṃ uggahītaṃ, tesu tvaṃ kiṃ labhe pasūra? SNP 46 simpl
What, Pasūra, would you gain among them here, those for whom there is nothing grasped as ultimate?
25.	evam'eva kho, bhikkhave, kull'ūpamo mayā dhammo desito nittharaṇ'atthāya, no gahaṇ'atthāya. MN 22
Monks, the Dhamma explained by me [is] similar to a raft, it is for the purpose of crossing over and not holding onto.




1.	na te ahaṃ sakkomi vitthārena dhammaṃ desetuṃ (VIN 4.1.14)
I am not able to explain the Teaching to you thoroughly.	
2.	samaṇo gotamo arahati bhavantaṃ kūṭadantaṃ dassanāya upasaṅkamituṃ (DN 5.2)
The recluse Gotama ought to visit sir Kūṭadanta to see him.
3.	atha kho te bhikkhū sāvatthiyaṃ piṇḍāya caritvā … (MN13)
After that, those monks, having walked for alms food in Sāvatthi…
 

