
Class 15 

1.  AN 5.29 caṅkama-suttaṃ
“pañcime, bhikkhave, caṅkame ānisaṃsā. katame pañca? addhānakkhamo hoti, padhānakkhamo hoti, appābādho hoti, asitaṃ pītaṃ khāyitaṃ sāyitaṃ sammā pariṇāmaṃ gacchati, caṅkamādhigato samādhi ciraṭṭhitiko hoti. ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca caṅkame ānisaṃsā”ti.


“Monks, [there are] these five benefits of walking meditation.
Which five?
he is enduring of a long journey,
he is enduring of exertion, 
he is healthy (lit: of not many illnesses)
what has been eaten, drunk, chewed, [and] tasted [is] gets digested thoroughly.
The stability of mind attained from walking meditation is long-lasting. 
Monks, these [are], indeed, the five benefits of walking meditation.”
 
2. AN 3.4 accaya-suttaṃ 
“tīhi, bhikkhave, dhammehi samannāgato bālo veditabbo. katamehi tīhi? accayaṃ accayato na passati, accayaṃ accayato disvā yathā-dhammaṃ nappaṭikaroti, parassa kho pana accayaṃ desentassa yathādhammaṃ nappaṭiggaṇhāti. imehi kho, bhikkhave, tīhi dhammehi samannāgato bālo veditabbo.


Monks, one endowed with three qualities should be known as a fool.
With which three?
He does not see a fault as a fault. 
Having understood a fault as a fault, he does not redress it in accordance with the Doctrine.
Indeed, when another person is pointing out a fault, he does not accept [it] in accordance with the Doctrine.
Certainly, monks, one possessing these three qualities should be known as a fool.
 
3. AN 5.198 vācā-suttaṃ 
“pañcahi, bhikkhave, aṅgehi samannāgatā vācā subhāsitā hoti, no dubbhāsitā, anavajjā ca ananuvajjā ca viññūnaṃ. katamehi pañcahi? kālena ca bhāsitā hoti, saccā ca bhāsitā hoti, saṇhā ca bhāsitā hoti, attha-saṃhitā ca bhāsitā hoti, metta-cittena ca bhāsitā hoti. imehi kho, bhikkhave, pañcahi aṅgehi samannāgatā vācā subhāsitā hoti, no dubbhāsitā, anavajjā ca ananuvajjā ca viññūnan”ti.


Monks, speech endowed with five factors is well-spoken and not  ill-spoken; it is unblameable and not censurable by wise people.
With which five?	
It is (speech) spoken at the proper time, it is spoken truthfully, it is spoken gently, it is spoken beneficially, it is spoken with a friendly mind.
Indeed, monks, speech endowed with these five qualities is well-spoken and not  ill-spoken; it is unblameable and not censurable by wise people.
 
4. SN 12.15 kaccānagotta-suttaṃ
“‘sammādiṭṭhi sammādiṭṭhī’ti, bhante, vuccati. kittāvatā nu kho, bhante, sammādiṭṭhi hotī”ti?
“dvayanissito kho ayaṃ, kaccāna, loko yebhuyyena — atthitaṃ ca eva n’atthitaṃ ca. lokasamudayaṃ kho, kaccāna, yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passato yā loke n’atthitā sā na hoti. lokanirodhaṃ kho, kaccāna, yathābhūtaṃ sammappaññāya passato yā loke atthitā sā na hoti. upayupādānābhinivesavinibandho kho ayaṃ, kaccāna, loko yebhuyyena. taṃ ce ayaṃ upayupādānaṃ cetaso adhiṭṭhānaṃ abhinives’ānusayaṃ na upeti na upādiyati n’ādhiṭṭhāti — ‘attā me’ti. ‘dukkhaṃ eva uppajjamānaṃ uppajjati, dukkhaṃ nirujjhamānaṃ nirujjhatī’ti na kaṅkhati na vicikicchati aparapaccayā ñāṇaṃ eva assa ettha hoti. ettāvatā kho, kaccāna, sammādiṭṭhi hoti.
“‘sabbaṃ atthī’ti kho, kaccāna, ayaṃ eko anto. ‘sabbaṃ n’atthī’ti ayaṃ dutiyo anto. ete te, kaccāna, ubho ante anupagamma majjhena tathāgato dhammaṃ deseti.



Venerable sir, it is said, “right view, right view.” In what way, venerable sir, is there truly “right view?”
This world, Kaccāna, for the most part [is] dependent on a duality–on the idea of existence as well as the ideal of non-existence.
Certainly, for one seeing the source of the world as it truly is with correct understanding there is not that idea of non-existence in regard to the world.
Indeed, for one seeing the cessation of the world as it really is with perfect wisdom, there is not that idea of existence.
Certainly, Kaccāna, this world is for the most part attached to engaging, grasping, and clinging. 
But this (person) does not get involved with engagement and grasping, mental standpoint, adherence and underlying tendency, he does not grasp at that idea of non-existence; he does not take a stand “(this is) my self.”
Arise is only arising suffering, cease is (only) ceasing suffering.
he has no uncertainty, he has no doubt. He has knowledge in this case exclusively independent of others. 
Truly, Kaccāna, to this extent there is right view.
“Everything exists,” Kaccāna: this is one extreme. “Everything does not exist”: this is the second extreme.
Avoiding both these extremes, Kaccāna, the Tathāgata teaches the doctrine by means of the middle.
