Class 8

AN 8.30	nisajja kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi
Having sat down, the Blessed One addressed the monks.
After sitting down, the Blessed One addressed the monks.

MN 39	 vivicca kāmehi vivicca akusalehi dhammehi, paṭhamaṃ jhānaṃ upasampajja viharati
Having separated from sense pleasures and unwholesome mental states, he arrives at the first stage of meditation and remains there. 
 
UD 45 mahānadiyo mahāsamuddaṃ patvā jahanti purimāni nāmagottāni
The great rivers, upon reaching the mighty ocean, they give up (their) old names.

UD 45	 mahāmoggallāno taṃ puggalaṃ bāhāyaṃ gahetvā nikkhāmetvā yena bhagavā ten’upasaṅkami.
The Great Mogallana seized that person by the arm, expelled (him), then approached the Blessed One. 
 
SN 47.10	āyasmā ānando tā bhikkhuniyo dhammiyā kathāya sandassetvā samādapetvā samuttejetvā sampahaṃsetvā uṭṭhāyāsanā pakkāmi
Venerable Ananda taught, instigated, fired up and delighted those nuns with a righteous talk, stood up from his seat and went.


 
SN 12.61 seyyathāpi makkaṭo araññe sākhaṃ gaṇhati taṃ muñcitvā aññaṃ gaṇhati taṃ muñcitvā aññaṃ gaṇhati
Just like a monkey in the forest [who] grabs hold of a branch, releases it, then grabs hold of another and after releasing it, grabs hold of another.
 
DN-a 2.3.3 sā pattaṃ gahetvā ākāse khipi. patto ākāse aṭṭhāsi
She grabbed a bowl and threw it into the sky. The bowl remained there. 
 
DN 22.1	dhammesu dhammānupassī viharati ātāpī sampajāno satimā vineyya loke abhijjhādomanassaṃ
One who watches mental phenomena lives among the phenomena.
ardent, knowing clearly, mindful
removing craving and mental suffering towards the world. 

 
UD 45 āyasmā ānando uṭṭhāya āsanā ekaṃsaṃ uttarāsaṅgaṃ karitvā yena bhagavā tenañjaliṃ paṇāmetvā bhagavantaṃ etadavoca. 
Venerable Ananda, rising from his seat and adjusting his upper robe over one shoulder, stretched out his palms towards the Blessed One and said this. 
 
SN 6.5 atha kho bhagavā tassa brahmuno upari vehāsaṃ pallaṅkena nisīdi tejodhātuṃ samāpajjitvā
And then the Blessed One, having attained the fire element, sat above that god in the sky in a cross-legged sitting posture. 
 

VIN PA.1	yo pana bhikkhu sikkhaṃ apaccakkhāya dubbalyaṃ anāvikatvā methunaṃ dhammaṃ paṭiseveyya pārājiko hoti asaṃvāso
And whichever monk, not renouncing the training, and not having disclosed his weakness, should engage in sexual activity, (that monk) is defeated and excommunicated.
 



1.	kaṇhaṃ dhammaṃ vippahāya, sukkaṃ bhāve paṇḍito, okā anokaṃ āgamma, viveke yattha dūramaṃ. DHP 087 simpl
A wise person, completely abandoning dark qualities, would cultivate pure [qualities], coming from home to homelessness, [living] in seclusion, where [it is] difficult to find delight.
2.	tatra abhiratiṃ iccheyya, hitvā kāme akiñcano,  pariyodapeyya attānaṃ, cittaklesehi paṇḍito.	DHP 088
A wise person, possession-less, would wish for pleasure in that place, having abandoned sensual pleasures, he would purify himself from mental defilements.
3.	yan’nūn’āhaṃ kesamassuṃ ohāretvā kāsāyāni vatthāni acchādetvā agārasmā anagāriyaṃ pabbajeyyāmi MN 27 simpl
Having shaved hair and beard, and having clothed myself in brown robes, let me go forth from the household life to homelessness. 
[What if I shave hair and beard, clothe myself in brown robes and go forth…?]
4.	% uppannānaṃ kusalānaṃ dhammānaṃ ṭhitiyā asammosāya bhiyyobhāvāya vepullāya bhāvanāya pāripūriyā chandaṃ janeti vāyamati vīriyaṃ ārabhati cittaṃ paggaṇhāti padahati DN 22.18
He strives, applies [his] mind, arouses effort, exerts himself, [and] generates approval for the non-confusion, increase by development, persistence, maturity, and completion of wholesome qualities that have arisen. 
5.	idha bhikkhu pallaṅkaṃ ābhujitvā, ujuṃ kāyaṃ paṇidhāya, parimukhaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhapetvā. MN 118
Here, a monk, having folded [his legs] in the cross-legged sitting position, directing [his] body [to sit] erectly, he establishes mindfulness as first priority.
6.	ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā bārāṇasiyaṃ viharati isipatane migadāye. tatra kho bhagavā pañcavaggiye bhikkhū āmantesi SN 22.59
On one occasion, the Blessed One was dwelling in Varanasi, in the Deer Park at Isipatana. There, the Blessed One addressed the monks belonging to the group of five.
7.	yo pana bhikkhu sañcarittaṃ samāpajjeyya itthiyā vā purisamatiṃ purisassa vā itthimatiṃ VIN PAT SA 5 
If any monk should engage in carrying proposals of man’s intention to a woman or woman’s intention to a man…
8.	dhammavādī ca eso bhikkhu vinayavādī ca eso bhikkhu amhākaṃ ca eso bhikkhu chandaṃ ca ruciṃ ca ādāya voharati VIN PAT SA 11 simpl
This monk who speaks according to the Dhamma, and this monk who speaks according to the Vinaya, speaks according to (i.e. in accordance with) our preference and approval…
9.	ciṇṇamānatto bhikkhu yattha siyā vīsatigaṇo bhikkhusaṅgho tattha so bhikkhu abbhetabbo. VIN PAT SA
A monk who has performed penance, where there could be a community of twenty monks, in that place he should be rehabilitated. 
10.	% no ce assa pāripūri, māsaparamaṃ so bhikkhu taṃ cīvaraṃ nikkhipeyya, ce assa ūnassa pāripūriyā paccāsā. VIN PAT NP 3 simpl
If it [i.e. the robe-cloth] should not be [enough] for completion, that monk should set [it] aside for a month at the most if there should be the expectation for the completion of the deficiency… 
11.	ekakassa me kathā vā nisajjā vā phāsu hotī”ti, etaṃ eva paccayaṃ karitvā anaññaṃ, pācittiyaṃ. VIN PAT PC 42
“There is ease for me talking or sitting down by myself;” having made this just for that reason, [and] no other, [this is] an offence requiring confession.
12.	rattiyā majjhimaṃ yāmaṃ dakkhiṇena passena sīhaseyyaṃ kappeyyāsi pāde pādaṃ accādhāya sato sampajāno uṭṭhānasaññaṃ manasikaritvā	MN 107
In the middle watch of the night, you should make the lion’s pose, [lying] on the right flank, placing [one] foot on the [other] foot, mindful, fully knowing, having noted in the mind the wake-up time.
13.	yattha nāmaṃ ca rūpaṃ ca asesaṃ uparujjhati, 
viññāṇassa nirodhena, ettha etaṃ uparujjhati. SNP 56
Wherever name and form is completely ended, here this thing is ended by means of the cessation of consciousness.
14.	atha kho āyasmā rāhulo, ajja bhagavatā sammukhā ovādena ovadito gāmaṃ piṇḍāya pavisitvā, tato paṭinivattitvā aññatarasmiṃ rukkhamūle nisīditvā MN 62 simpl
And then, after entering the village for alms food [and] coming back from that, [and] having sat down at the foot of a certain tree, Venerable Rāhula now face-to-face with the Blessed One, was instructed by exhortation.  
15.	 etādisāni katvāna, sabbattha aparājitā, sabbattha sotthiṃ gacchanti SNP 16
Having done [things] of this kind, victorious everywhere, they go everywhere safely.
16.	idha, bhante, koci'd'eva dhammo samuppādo uppajjeyya, ekato assa bhagavā ekato bhikkhusaṅgho ca. SN 55.23
Here, venerable sir, some or other issue [concerning] the teaching could arise, the Blessed One might be on one side and the community of monks on one [i.e. the other] side.
17.	% yāva hi vanatho na chijjati, aṇumatto api narassa nārīsu, paṭibaddhamano eva tāva so, vaccho khīrapako va mātari. DHP 284
Indeed, as long as desire is not cut off, even the smallest, of a man enamoured with regard to women, just to that extent he [is] like a suckling calf towards [its] mother. 
18.	atha kho pajjunnassa dhītā abhikkantāya rattiyā abhikkantavaṇṇā kevalakappaṃ mahāvanaṃ obhāsetvā SN 1.39
And then, when the night had progressed, the daughter of the god of rain, stunningly beautiful, having illuminated almost the entire great wood [approached the Blessed One].
19.	dve kho, āvuso, paccayā animittāya cetovimuttiyā samāpattiyā, sabbanimittānaṃ ca amanasikāro, animittāya ca dhātuyā manasikāro. MN 43
Friend, [there are] indeed two supporting conditions for the attainment of the signless liberation of mind: non-attention to all objects and attention to the signless state. 
20.	ayaṃ me mātā, tassā me mātu ayaṃ mātā iti, apariyādinnā va bhikkhave, tassa purisassa mātumātaro assu. SN 15.1
“This [is] my mother, this [is] the mother of my mother”; [the sequence] of that man’s mothers’ mothers would not even be exhausted.
21.	mātugāmo nāma manuss'itthī, na yakkhī na petī na tiracchānagatā. antamaso tad'ahujātā api dārikā, pag'eva mahattarī. VIN 1.3.1
[What] is called a woman [is] a human female, neither female demon nor female ghost nor female animal, even a girl born that very day, to say nothing of [one] older.
22.	khuddaṃ paṭihanati, pipāsaṃ paṭivineti, vātaṃ anulometi, vatthiṃ sodheti, ām'āvasesaṃ pāceti. ime kho, bhikkhave, pañca ānisaṃsā yāguyā. AN 5.207
It wards off hunger, dispels thirst, settles wind, purifies the bladder, [and] digests remnants of undigested food. Indeed, monks, these are the five benefits of rice porridge.




1.	atha kho aññataro brāhmaṇo yena bhagavā tena upasaṅkami. upasaṅkamitvā bhagavatā saddhiṃ sammodi (AN 2.16)
After that, a certain brahmin approached the Blessed One. Having approached, he exchanged pleasantries with the Blessed One.



 
