Class 2 Exercises

namo tassa bhagavato arahato sammā-sambuddhassa	 					
Homage to him, the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the fully Enlightened One.
 
avijjāya tv'eva asesa-virāga-nirodhā saṅkhāra-nirodho, saṅkhāra-nirodhā viññāṇa-nirodho, viññāṇa-nirodhā nāmarūpa-nirodho, nāmarūpa-nirodhā saḷāyatana-nirodho, saḷāyatana-nirodhā phassa-nirodho, phassa-nirodhā vedanā-nirodho, vedanā-nirodhā taṇhā-nirodho, taṇhā-nirodhā upādāna-nirodho, upādāna-nirodhā bhava-nirodho, bhava-nirodhā jāti-nirodho, jāti-nirodhā jarā-maraṇaṃ soka-parideva-dukkha-domanass'upāyāsā nirujjhanti. 
But from the complete fading away and cessation of ignorance there is cessation of volitional formations; from the cessation of volitional formations, cessation of consciousness; from the cessation of consciousness, cessation of name-and-form; from the cessation of name-and-form, cessation of the six sense bases; from the cessation of the six sense bases, cessation of contact; from the cessation of contact, cessation of feeling; from the cessation of feeling, cessation of craving; from the cessation of craving, cessation of clinging; from the cessation of clinging, cessation of existence; from the cessation of existence, cessation of birth; from the cessation of birth, aging-and-death, sorrow, lamentation, pain, displeasure, and despair cease. 
 
buddho kira loke uppanno SN10.8
A Buddha has indeed arisen in the world.
 
TH 257 simpl
araññe rukkhānaṃ mūlesu, kandarāsu guhāsu ca
At the foot of a tree in a forest, in valleys, and in caves.
 
DN 22.1  simpl
maggo hoti sokaparidevānaṃ samatikkamāya, ñāyassa adhigamāya, nibbānassa sacchikiriyāya.
It is the path for the overcoming of sorrow and lamentation, for the attainment of the (right) method, for personal experience of total emancipation.
 
AN 10.48
uttarissa manussassa dhammo alam’ariyo ñāṇadassanassa viseso
the state of a superior human being, the attainment of knowing and seeing, suitable for a noble person,
 
DN 22.5 
atthi imasmiṃ kāye kesā lomā nakhā dantā taco
There are in this body, hair [on the head], hairs of the body, nails, teeth, skin.
 
VIN PAT SE 55 simpl
na sāmisena hatthena pānīyassa thālakaṃ paṭiggahessāmi iti sikkhā karaṇīyā
I will not take a cup for drinking water with a soiled hand.
 
VIN PAT NID nidānuddeso
saṅgho uposathaṃ kareyya, pātimokkhaṃ uddiseyya
The community of monks could make an observance day [and] would recite the training rules.


itipi so bhagavā arahaṃ sammāsambuddho vijjācaraṇasampanno sugato lokavidū anuttaro purisadammasārathi satthā devamanussānaṃ buddho bhagavā’ti
It is so (thus) “He [is] the Blessed One, the Worthy One, the fully Enlightened One, endowed with wisdom and ethical conduct, Fortunate One, knower of the world, incomparable leader of persons to be tamed, teacher of gods and humans, the Awakened One, the Blessed One.”
 
1.	kāyassa bhedā VIN1.1.3
From the break-up of the body
2.	samaṇo gotamo AN10.29
The recluse Gotama
3.	virāgāya nirodhāya SN22.57
for dispassion, for cessation
4.	bālassa mohāya TH251
for the delusion of the fool
5.	kāmehi lokamhi (TH 251)
[there is no satisfaction] by sensual pleasures in the world
6.	devā manussā
gods and humans
7.	cāgo paṭinissaggo anālayo SN56.11
The relinquishing, the abandonment, the non-attachment
8.	pāde pādaṃ (MN 107)
[he places] a foot on a foot
9.	dhammānaṃ uppādāya chandaṃ (DN 22.18)
[he arouses] desire for the arising of states of mind
10.	khandhānaṃ bhedo VIBH6.1
the break-up of the aggregates
11.	% dhammā virāgāya (AN 8.53) 
[these] things/qualities [lead] to dispassion
12.	dhammā sekhassa AN8.79
qualities of a trainee
13.	samaṇena vā brāhmaṇena vā devena vā mārena vā SN56.11
with either a recluse or a brahmin or a deity or Mara
14.	saṅkhārā ābādhāya (SN 22.59) %
Volitional formations [are conducive for] disease
15.	sokehi paridevehi dukkhehi domanassehi upāyāsehi (SN 35.28)
(burning) with griefs, lamentations, sufferings, distresses, afflictions
16.	dhammo vinayo 
The Doctrine-Discipline
17.	vinipātaṃ nirayaṃ (SN 12.41)
[reborn] in a state of suffering, in hell.
18.	aparena samayena buddho
on another occasion, the Awakened One…
19.	gabbhe cīvaraṃ VIN1.4.1.2
the robe in the room
20.	āvāse vassaṃ (VIN 1.1.4)
(entered) the rainy season at the dwelling place.
21.	nīvaraṇehi brāhmaṇo (MN 99)
The brahmin [filled] with the [five] hindrances
22.	kāme brāhmaṇa
O, brahmin! … sensual pleasures
23.	atthamhi sahāyā (DHP 331)
[Good are] friends in [arisen] need 
[Good are] friends when need [arises]
24.	gotamo sāvake … gotamassa sāvakesu (MN 35)
Gotama [trains] disciples…. Gotama’s [instruction presented] to disciples
25.	kassapassa vinayasmiṃ SN19.21
in the discipline of the Kassapa
26.	$ saṅghamhā saṅgho (AN 8.19) 
[far] from the Saṅgha [and] the Saṅgha [is far from]