
Class 7

MN 152	jivhāya rasaṃ sāyitvā uppajjati manāpaṃ
Having tasted a flavour with the tongue, a pleasant experience arises. 
 
DN 16.27	 so tathāgataṃ pūjeti paramāya pūjāya
He honors the Buddha with the highest veneration.

 

DN 16.14	 assosuṃ mallā, bhagavā kusinārāyaṃ parinibbuto’ti
The Mallans heard, “The Blessed One had final Nibbāna in Kusinara”



 
AN 8.53	ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā vesāliyaṃ viharati mahāvane kūṭāgāra-sālāyaṃ
At one time the Blessed One was living in Vesali, in the great wood, in the hall of the building with the peaked roof. 
 

DN 22.7	bhikkhu seyyathāpi passeyya sarīraṃ sivathikāya chaḍḍitaṃ 
Imagine if a monk could see a dead body discarded in a charnel ground.
 
MN 14 kin’ti me bhoge na corā hareyyuṃ
 How then could thieves not steal my valuables?
 
AN 7.61	tvaṃ moggallāna disā anuvilokeyyāsi nakkhattāni ullokeyyāsi 
Moggallāna, you should look all around in all directions, and look up at the constellations.
 

DN 2.19	so aparena samayena tamhā ābādhā mucceyya
After some time, he could become free from that illness.

 
VIN PAT PC 57	yo pana bhikkhu oren’addhamāsaṃ nahāyeyya, pācittiyan’ti
whichever monk should bathe within half a month, that is a pācittiya (a case requiring confession). 

 
VIN PA.2	rājāno coraṃ gahetvā haneyyuṃ vā bandheyyuṃ vā pabbājeyyuṃ vā
The king’s men, having captured a thief, could kill (him) or imprison him or banish him. 
 




1.	yaṃnūn'āhaṃ bhagavantaṃ sammukhā sāruppāya gāthāya abhitthaveyyāmi	SN 8.11 simpl
Maybe I should praise the Blessed One face-to-face with an appropriate verse.
2.	evaṃ no ayaṃ amhākaṃ pabbajjā avaṅkatā avañjhā bhaveyya	SN 12.22 simpl
In this way, indeed, our renunciation would not be sterile, would not be dishonest.
3.	abhijjhaṃ loke pajaheyyuṃ vigat’ābhijjhena cetasā vihareyyuṃ; abhijjhāya cittaṃ parisodheyyuṃ MN 107 simpl 
They would abandon covetousness with reference to the world, they would dwell with a mind free from covetousness, they would purify the mind from covetousness.
4.	ime ce tumhe cha sāraṇīye dhamme samādāya vatteyyātha, passatha no tumhe taṃ vacanapathaṃ, aṇuṃ vā thūlaṃ vā, yaṃ tumhe n’ādhivāseyyātha? MN 104
If you could practice undertaking these six cordial things, do you see any way of saying things (i.e. mode of expression), gross or subtle, which you could not tolerate?
5.	bhikkhave, bhikkhū paccattaṃ satiṃ upaṭṭhāpessanti: “kin’ti anāgatā ca pesalā sabrahmacārī āgaccheyyuṃ, āgatā ca pesalā sabrahmacārī phāsuṃ vihareyyuṃ?” iti 	AN 7.23
Bhikkhus, the monks will establish mindfulness individually [with the intention]: “How then well-behaved fellow monks [who] have not come could come and (how) well-behaved monks [who] have come could dwell at ease?”
6.	siyā kho pana ananda, tumhākaṃ evaṃ assa — "n'atthi no satthā" iti.	DN 16.36 simpl
And now, Ananda, it could be thus would occur to you: “there is no teacher for us.” 
7.	ye kho tvaṃ dhamme jāneyyāsi AN 8.53
Indeed, whatever things you might know…
8.	devatā bhagavantaṃ gāthāya ajjhabhāsi SNP 16
The deity addressed the Blessed One with a verse.
9.	so tatonidānaṃ labheyya pāmojjaṃ, adhigaccheyya somanassaṃ	MN 39
Because of that he would obtain gladness, he would experience pleasure.
10.	atītaṃ n’ānvāgameyya, nappaṭikaṅkhe anāgataṃ.	MN 131
He should not return to the past, he should not anticipate the future.
11.	n’atthi taṃ kiñci lokasmiṃ yaṃ ahaṃ upādiyamāno na vajjavā assaṃ. SN 22.80
There is not anything in the world which I am grasping [and] would not be with faults [i.e. and would not be blameworthy].
12.	ce tumhe assatha kupitā vā anattamanā vā, tumhaṃ tena antarāyo.	DN 1.1
If you were to be angry or irritated, on that account [it would be] an obstacle for you all.
13.	siyā ca tassa bhikkhuno koci'd'eva paccayo senaṃ gamanāya VIN PAT PC 49
And if there might be some or other reason for that monk for going to see an army…
14.	idha, gahapati, ekaccassa evaṃ hoti, evaṃrūpo siyaṃ anāgatam'addhānaṃ, evaṃvedano siyaṃ anāgatam'addhānaṃ SN 22.3
In this regard, householder, some think [lit: there is thus for some], may I be of such form in the future, may I be having such feeling in the future.
15.	kiṃ kareyya udapānena, āpā ce sabbadā siyuṃ,
taṇhāya mūlato chetvā, kissa pariyesanaṃ care? UD 69
What one could do with the well, if always there could be water?; Having cut off the craving from the source, why would he go about searching?
16.	mayaṃ migajātānaṃ āsayaṃ passeyyāma, yattha te gāhaṃ gaccheyyun'ti. MN 25 simpl
“We could see the dwelling of a species of deer, where they would go [for] a hiding place.”
17.	yo pana bhikkhu mātugāmaṃ duṭṭhullāhi vācāhi obhāseyya VIN PAT SA 3 simpl
If any monk should speak to a woman coarsely by means of obscene words…
18.	idha bhikkhuno pavivittassa viharato bhaveyyuṃ upasaṅkamitāro bhikkhū upāsakā upāsikāyo AN 8.30 simpl
In this regard, for a monk dwelling secluded, visitors would (come) - monks, male lay disciples, [and] female lay disciples.
19.	yāva’d’eva uppannānaṃ veyyābādhikānaṃ vedanānaṃ paṭighātāya abyāpajjhaparamatāya	 MN 2.4
Only as much as for the freedom from obsessive pain at the most, for the warding off of oppressive feelings that have arisen.
20.	desetu, bhante, bhagavā dhammaṃ, desetu sugato dhammaṃ. santi sattā apparajakkhajātikā, assavanatā dhammassa parihāyanti. MN 26
Venerable Sir, let the Blessed One teach the doctrine, let the well-gone One teach the doctrine; there are living beings who have little dirt in their eyes, [who] are wasting away by the fact of not hearing the teaching.	


1.	te tāvataken’eva attamanā assu (DN 10)
With just this much they would be pleased.
2.	evaṃrūpo siyaṃ anāgatamaddhānaṃ (SN 22.3)
May I be of such form in the future.
3.	aho vata mayaṃ na maraṇadhammā assāma (MN 10.16)
If only we could be not of the nature to die!
