Class 12 

MN 4 anekavihitaṃ pubbenivāsaṃ anussarāmi, seyyathidaṃ - ekam’pi jātiṃ dve’pi jātiyo tisso’pi jātiyo catasso’pi jātiyo pañca’pi jātiyo dasa’pi jātiyo vīsam’pi jātiyo tiṃsam’pi jātiyo cattālīsam’pi jātiyo paññāsam’pi jātiyo jātisatam’pi jātisahassam’pi jātisatasahassam’pi
I recollected manifold past lives, that is, one birth, two births, three births, four births, five births, ten births, twenty births, thirty births, forty births, fifty births, a hundred births, a thousand births, a hundred thousand births
 
SNP 5	
caturo samaṇā na pañcam’atthi, 
te te āvikaromi sakkhipuṭṭho.
There are four (kinds of) ascetics, there is not a fifth.
Questioned face to face, I will clarify those for you. 
 
MN 16 seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, kukkuṭiyā aṇḍāni aṭṭha vā dasa vā dvādasa vā.
Imagine if, monks, there could be hen’s eggs, eight or ten or twelve.
 
UD 45 seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, mahāsamuddo ekaraso loṇaraso, 
evam’eva kho, bhikkhave, ayaṃ dhammavinayo ekaraso vimuttiraso
Monks, just as the great ocean has one taste, the taste of salt
Likewise, monks, this teaching and training has one taste, the flavour of liberation.
 
SN 1.37 ekaṃ samayaṃ bhagavā sakkesu viharati  bhikkhusaṅghena saddhiṃ pañcamattehi bhikkhusatehi sabbeh’eva arahantehi
On one occasion, the Blessed One was dwelling among the Sakyans.
With a community of monks, five hundred monks, all exclusively arahants.
 
AN 1.12 n’āhaṃ, bhikkhave, aññaṃ ekadhammam’pi samanupassāmi yena anuppanno byāpādo uppajjati,  yathayidaṃ, bhikkhave, paṭighanimittaṃ
I don’t see even one single other thing, monks
because of which unarisen ill-will arises
such as a disliked image.
 
SN 56.14 cattāri imāni, bhikkhave, ariyasaccāni. katamāni cattāri?
Monks, [there are] these four noble truths, which four?
 
SN 12.63 kabaḷīkāro āhāro oḷāriko vā sukhumo vā, phasso dutiyo, manosañcetanā tatiyā, viññāṇaṃ catutthaṃ
heavy or refined edible food
sense contact is the second
mental volition is the third
consciousness is the fourth
 
UD 45 ayaṃ, bhikkhave, imasmiṃ dhammavinaye chaṭṭho acchariyo abbhuto dhammo
o monk, there is these sixth wonderful, amazing quality with respect to this Doctrine and Discipline.
 
DN 13.8 so mettāsahagatena cetasā ekaṃ disaṃ pharitvā viharati, tathā dutiyaṃ, tathā tatiyaṃ, tathā catutthaṃ
He dwells/abides having pervaded one direction with a mind full of lovingkindness.
Likewise, the second, third and fourth.
 


1.	aṭṭhārasa api mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; chattiṃsa api mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; aṭṭhasataṃ api mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena. SN 36.22
I have spoken [of] eighteen feelings in one way,	
also I have spoken of thirty-six feelings by [another] way,
also I have spoken of one hundred and eight feelings by [another] way.
2.	yāvakīvañ'ca me, bhikkhave, imesu catūsu ariyasaccesu saha tīhi parivaṭṭehi saha dvādasahi ākārehi yathābhūtaṃ ñāṇadassanaṃ na suvisuddhaṃ ahosi, SN 56.11 simpl
Monks, as long as for me, knowledge and vision were not perfectly purified with regard to the Four Noble Truths as they truly are in [their] three phases together with [their] twelve aspects….
3.	catūhi apāyehi ca vippamutto, cha ca abhiṭhānāni abhabbo kātuṃ	SNP 13 simpl
One is released from the four states of misery and is unable to perform the six heinous crimes.
4.	ye ariyasaccāni vibhāvayanti, gambhīrapaññena sudesitāni.  kiñ'c'āpi te honti bhusaṃ pamattā, na te bhavaṃ aṭṭhamaṃ ādiyanti. SNP 13
They who understand clearly the Noble Truths well taught by one with profound wisdom,
Even though they are exceedingly negligent, they do not grasp an eighth state of existence.
5.	tassa eva kho pana bhikkhussa bhikkhū honti, anuvattakā vaggavādakā, eko vā dve vā tayo vā, te evaṃ vadeyyuṃ VIN PAT SA 11
But now there are monks who are followers of just that monk, [and] who are proponents of [his] faction – one or two or three – [and] they should say thus…
6.	% tam'enaṃ saddheyyavacasā upāsikā disvā tiṇṇaṃ dhammānaṃ aññatarena vadeyya, pārājikena vā saṅghādisesena vā pācittiyena vā VIN PAT AN 1 
…a lay woman, whose words can be trusted, having then seen that should speak in accordance with one of three rules: according to an offence involving defeat, according to an offence requiring suspension, according to an offence requiring confession.
7.	cattāro ca mahābhūtā, catunnaṃ ca mahābhūtānaṃ upādāya rūpaṃ – idaṃ vuccati rūpaṃ. SN12.2
The four great elements and the material form derived from the four great elements; this is called material form.
8.	aṭṭhārasa api mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; chattiṃsa api mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena; aṭṭhasataṃ api mayā vedanā vuttā pariyāyena. SN 36.22
I have spoken [of] eighteen feelings in one way,	
also I have spoken of thirty-six feelings by [another] way,
also I have spoken of one hundred and eight feelings by [another] way.
9.	yad'idaṃ cattāri purisayugāni aṭṭha purisapuggalā, esa bhagavato sāvakasaṅgho SN 11.3
This is the community of disciples of the Blessed One, namely, the four pairs of persons, the eight individuals.
10.	evam'eva tesaṃ caturāsītīnaṃ pāṇānaṃ sahassānaṃ tasmiṃ eva āsane virajaṃ vītamalaṃ dhammacakkhuṃ udapādi DN 14.14
Similarly, spotless, untainted spiritual insight arose for those eighty-four thousand beings just in that place.
11.	imehi kho, bhikkhave, dasahi dhammehi samannāgato bhikkhu samanta'pāsādiko ca hoti sabb'ākāraparipūro ca AN 10.8
Surely, a monk endowed with these ten qualities is one who is complete in every aspect and who inspires confidence in every way.
12.	pañca ahaṃ nīvaraṇe sāhāre vadāmi, no anāhāre. ko ca āhāro pañcannaṃ nīvaraṇānaṃ? tīṇi duccaritāni AN 10.61
I speak of five hindrances with nutriment, [they are] not without nutriment.
And what is the nutriment of the five hindrances? The three [kinds of] misconduct.
13.	taṃ kiṃ maññatha, api nu so puriso divasaṃ tīhi sattīhi satehi haññamāno tatonidānaṃ dukkhaṃ domanassaṃ paṭisaṃvediyeyya? SN 12.63 simpl
“What do you think? Wouldn’t that man, being struck during the day with three hundred spears, experience suffering and distress on that account?”
14.	namo bhagavato, namo sattannaṃ sammāsambuddhānaṃ AN 4.67
Homage to the Blessed One, homage to the seven Perfectly Enlightened Ones.
 15. vanappagumbe yathā phussit’agge, 
gimhāna-māse paṭhamasmiṃ gimhe. 
tath’ūpamaṃ dhamma-varaṃ adesayi,  
nibbāna-gāmiṃ paramaṃ hitāya. SNP 13
Like a forest grove with a flowering crest in the first heat of the hot month, he taught the sublime teaching leading to Nibbāna, for the benefit.
16. $ seyyathāpi, bhikkhave, gaṇḍo anekavassagaṇiko. tassa assu gaṇḍassa nava vaṇamukhāni nava abhedanamukhāni. AN 9.15
That boil would have nine wound openings, nine natural orifices.
17. dissati ayaṃ, bhikkhave, cātumahābhūtiko kāyo ekaṃ api vassaṁ tiṭṭhamāno dve api vassāni tiṭṭhamāno tīṇi ... cattāri ... pañca ... dasa ... vīsati ... tiṃsaṃ ... cattārīsaṃ api vassāni tiṭṭhamāno paññāsaṃ api vassāni tiṭṭhamāno vassasataṃ api tiṭṭhamāno, bhiyyo api tiṭṭhamāno. SN 12.61
It is observed, monks, [that] this body, composed of the four great elements, is standing just one year, [or] just two years, … three … four … five … ten … twenty … thirty … forty … fifty [or] remaining one hundred years [or] even remaining more than [that].
18. evaṃ, bhante'ti kho āyasmā soṇo bhagavato paṭissutvā soḷasa aṭṭhakavaggikāni sabbāni eva sarena abhaṇi. UD 46
“Yes, venerable sir.” Having responded in agreement to the Blessed One, Venerable Soṇa indeed recited melodiously all sixteen [suttas], belonging to the groups of eight.
19. iti h'etaṃ vijānāma, navamo so parābhavo. 
dasamaṃ bhagavā brūhi. kiṃ parābhavato mukhaṃ? SNP 6
Indeed this we understand, [that] this [is] the ninth downfall. May the Blessed One tell [us] the tenth: What [is] the cause of the downfall?
20. tassa imāni satta ratanāni bhavanti, seyyath'idaṃ, cakkaratanaṃ, hatthiratanaṃ, assaratanaṃ, maṇiratanaṃ, itthiratanaṃ, gahapatiratanaṃ, pariṇāyakaratanaṃ eva sattamaṃ. MN 91
[A Wheel-turning Monarch] has these seven treasures, namely: the wheel treasure, the elephant treasure, the horse treasure, the jewel treasure, the woman treasure, the steward treasure, [and] as the seventh, the counselor treasure. 




1.	eke samaṇabrāhmaṇā evaṃvādino evaṃdiṭṭhino DN 9.6
Some monks and brahmins who hold the view, [who are] of the opinion…
 

