
Class 14 


MN 39	 so imam’eva kāyaṃ vivekajena pītisukhena abhisandeti parisandeti paripūreti parippharati
He causes this very body to overflow, to flow around, to fill up all around, to suffuse with the joy and happiness born from separation [from the hindrances].
 
DN 23.20	atha kho pāyāsi rājañño uttaraṃ māṇavaṃ āmantāpetvā etad’avoca
And then, having had summoned a young brahmin Uttara, Payasi, the young nobleman, said this.
 
AN 2.19	kusalaṃ, bhikkhave, bhāvetha. sakkā, bhikkhave, kusalaṃ bhāvetuṃ 
You should develop wholesome qualities.
It is possible to develop wholesome qualities. 
DN 14.4 atha kho, bhikkhave, bandhumā rājā vipassissa kumārassa tayo pāsāde kārāpesi
And then, monks, King Bandhuma had three palaces built for prince Vipassi.
MN 152	divasaṃsantatte ayokaṭāhe dve vā tīṇi vā udakaphusitāni nipāteyya
He would drop two or three drops of water into an iron pot, [which] was heated during the day. 
 
SN 47.10	so paṭisaṃharati c’eva na ca vitakketi na ca vicāreti
He withdraws [the mind] and does not think or examine.
 
AN 5.54 na sukaraṃ uñchena paggahena yāpetuṃ. ayaṃ tatiyo asamayo padhānāya.	
It is not easy to sustain oneself by means of gleaning and by handouts.
This is the third unsuitable time for making effort.
 
AN 3.83	tasmātiha, bhikkhave, evaṃ sikkhitabbaṃ
Therefore, monks, it should be trained like this. 
 

MN 18 ettha ce n’atthi abhinanditabbaṃ abhivaditabbaṃ ajjhositabbaṃ, es’ev’anto paṭigh’ānusayānaṃ,
If here, there is not [something which] should be delighted in, welcomed, clung to
Just this is the end of the underlying tendency towards conflict. 
 
VIN 1.2.12	mā āyasmā attānaṃ avacanīyaṃ akāsi
Venerable, don’t make yourself unadmonishable.
 
SN 12.63	kathañ’ca, bhikkhave, kabaḷīkāro āhāro daṭṭhabbo?
And how, monks, should edible food be seen?
 
AN 4.42	atthi bhikkhave pañho ekaṃsavyākaraṇīyo, atthi bhikkhave pañho vibhajjavyākaraṇīyo … atthi bhikkhave pañho ṭhapanīyo
There is, monks, a question which should be answered directly
There is, monks, a question which should be answered by analysing in detail.
There is, monks, a question which should be set aside.
 
MN 20	 adhicittam’anuyuttena, bhikkhave, bhikkhunā pañca nimittāni kālena kālaṃ manasi kātabbāni. 
Five features should be kept in mind from time to time by a monk who is devoted to the higher mind.
 
AN 10.48	dasa’y’ime, bhikkhave, dhammā pabbajitena abhiṇhaṃ paccavekkhitabbā.
These ten matters should be regularly reflected on by one who has gone forth.
 
DN 16.11	evañ’ca kho eso, bhikkhu, pañho pucchitabbo
But, monk, this question should be asked like this.
 
AN 4.147	cattāro’me, bhikkhave, kālā sammā bhāviyamānā sammā anuparivattiyamānā anupubbena āsavānaṃ khayaṃ pāpenti
These four times, monks, being correctly developed and done routinely
they lead gradually to the destruction of the defilmenents.





1.	yo pana bhikkhu yāvatatiyaṃ anusāviyamāne saramāno santiṃ āpattiṃ n'āvikareyya, sampajānamusāvādo assa hoti. VIN PAT NID
If any monk remembering [an offence] when it is being announced up to three times should not disclose the existing offence, there is [a further offence] for him [of] deliberate false speech.
2.	orena ce channaṃ vassānaṃ, taṃ santhataṃ vissajjetvā vā avissajjetvā vā, aññaṃ navaṃ santhataṃ kārāpeyya	VIN PAT NP 14
If sooner than [after] six years, having given up or not having given up that coverlet, he should cause to make another new coverlet…
3.	so vata āvuso, cakkhusmiṃ sati rūpe sati cakkhuviññāṇe sati phassapaññattiṃ paññāpessatī’ti — ṭhānaṃ etaṃ vijjati. MN 18
Certainly, friend, when eye, form, and eye-consciousness are existing, it is possible to declare the concept of contact.
4.	tāni ce sutte otāriyamānāni vinaye sandassiyamānāni sutte c'eva otaranti vinaye ca sandissanti AN 4.180
If when they are being checked in the scripture(s), [and] being verified in reference to the discipline, and they are found in the scripture(s) as well as seen in the discipline…
5.	so dhammaṃ deseti ādikalyāṇaṃ majjhekalyāṇaṃ pariyosānakalyāṇaṃ sātthaṃ sabyañjanaṃ, kevalaparipuṇṇaṃ parisuddhaṃ brahmacariyaṃ pakāseti. MN 27
He teaches the doctrine, beneficial in the beginning, beneficial in the middle, and beneficial in the end, in spirit and in letter;
he illuminates the spiritual path, pure [and] altogether complete.
6.	bhikkhave, ye te mayā dhammā abhiññā desitā, te vo sādhukaṃ uggahetvā āsevitabbā bhāvetabbā bahulīkātabbā DN 16.21
Monks, these things which have been taught by me with direct knowledge (i.e. from my direct knowledge), having been thoroughly grasped by you, they should be pursued, cultivated and practised often.
7.	yāvakīvañ’ca bhikkhave bhikkhū apaññattaṃ na paññāpessanti, paññattaṃ na samucchindissanti, yathāpaññattesu sikkhāpadesu samādāya vattissanti AN 7.23
As long as monks will not make known what is not declared [and] will not cut off completely what is declared, 
they will go forward, undertaking training rules as they formulated.
8.	āhāre paṭikūlasaññāya paricitena, bhikkhave, bhikkhuno cetasā bahulaṃ viharato, rasataṇhāya cittaṃ patilīyati patikuṭati pativattati, na sampasāriyati, upekkhā vā pāṭikulyatā vā saṇṭhāti. AN 7.49
For a monk frequently remaining with the mind fortified by the perception of the repulsiveness of food 
[his] mind withdraws from, bends back from, rolls back from craving for tastes,
equanimity or revulsion is established.
9.	taṃ kho pan’idaṃ dukkhasamudayaṃ ariyasaccaṃ pahātabban’ti SN 56.11
“Moreover, indeed, this noble truth [of] the origin of suffering should be abandoned.”
10.	yo pana bhikkhu sañcicca manussaviggahaṃ jīvitā voropeyya satthahārakaṃ vā assa pariyeseyya maraṇavaṇṇaṃ vā saṃvaṇṇeyya maraṇāya vā samādapeyya VIN PAT PA 3
If any monk should intentionally deprive a human being of life or should seek out an assassin for him or should commend the advantage of death or should incite [him] to death…
11.	% saññācikāya pana bhikkhunā kuṭi kārayamānena, assāmikā  att’uddesā, pamāṇikā kāretabbā VIN PAT SA 6 simpl
A hut [that] a monk is causing to be built, by means of his own begging, with no owner [and] intended for himself, should be built according to the correct measurement.
12.	tādisikāya āpattiyā ekaccaṃ pabbājenti ekaccaṃ na pabbājentī”ti, so bhikkhu bhikkhūhi evaṃ assa vacanīyo VIN PAT SA 13
“They banish a certain one with this kind of offence, [but] they don’t banish another one.” That monk is to be spoken to by the monks like this: …
13.	santar'uttaraparamaṃ tena bhikkhunā taṃ cīvaraṃ sāditabbaṃ. tato ce uttari sādiyeyya, nissaggiyaṃ pācittiyaṃ. VIN PAT NP 7
That robe cloth [for] an under [robe] and an upper [robe] at the most could be accepted by that monk;
if he should accept [robe cloth] more than that, [it is] an offence involving relinquishment.
14.	% tena bhikkhunā so patto bhikkhuparisāya nissajjitabbo, yo ca tassā bhikkhuparisāya pattapariyanto, so tassa bhikkhuno padātabbo, ‘‘ayaṃ te bhikkhu patto yāva bhedanāya dhāretabbo’ti, ayaṃ tattha sāmīci. VIN PAT NP 22
That (alms) bowl is to be relinquished by that monk to the assembly of monks;
and that which is the worst bowl of that assembly of monks
that [bowl] should be given to that monk
“monk, this is your bowl. It should be kept until breaking.”
This is the correct procedure in that case.
15.	sevitabbe dhamme na jānāti asevitabbe dhamme na jānāti, bhajitabbe dhamme na jānāti abhajitabbe dhamme na jānāti. MN 46
He doesn’t know the practices that should be followed, he doesn’t know the practices that should not be followed; 
He doesn’t know the things that should be adhered to, he doesn’t know the practices that should not be adhered to.
16.	tassa amanasikaraṇīyānaṃ dhammānaṃ amanasikārā manasikaraṇīyānaṃ dhammānaṃ manasikārā anuppannā c'eva āsavā na uppajjanti, uppannā ca āsavā pahīyanti MN 2.2
For him, because of non-attention to the things that should not be attended to [and] attention to the things that should be attended to,
unarisen taints do not arise and even taints that have arisen are abandoned. 
17.	% ayaṃ vuccati, bhikkhave, bhikkhu sabb'āsavasaṃvarasaṃvuto viharati, acchejji taṇhaṃ, vivattayi saṃyojanaṃ, sammā mān'ābhisamayā antam'akāsi dukkhassā'ti MN 2.8
Monks, this one is said to be “a monk who dwells restrained with regard to all the taints, 
[who] completely cut out craving, untied the fetter[s], [and] by means of a thorough comprehension of conceit (thoroughly comprehending conceit), made an end of suffering”
18.	hitvā agāraṃ pabbajitā, hitvā puttaṃ pasuṃ piyaṃ, hitvā rāgaṃ ca dosaṃ ca, avijjaṃ ca virājiya, khīṇ'āsavā arahanto, te lokasmiṃ anussukā. SN 1.28
“Having abandoned the household life [and] gone forth, having left their dear child[ren] and livestock, having left behind passion and ill-will, removing ignorance, enlightened beings who have destroyed the taints,  they are unagitated in the world.
19.	anabhinanditvā appaṭikkositvā tāni padabyañjanāni sādhukaṃ uggahetvā, sutte otāretabbāni vinaye sandassetabbāni. AN 4.180
Having not approved of nor rejected these words and phrases, [and] having grasped [them] thoroughly,
they should be checked in the discourse[s] and should be verified in the discipline. 
20.	atha kho bhagavā bhikkhū āmantesi, ārādhayiṃsu vata me, bhikkhave, bhikkhū ekaṃ samayaṃ cittaṃ. idha ahaṃ, bhikkhave, bhikkhū āmantesiṃ, ahaṃ kho, bhikkhave, ek'āsanabhojanaṃ bhuñjāmi. MN 21
And then the Blessed One addressed the monks: “Monks, on one occasion the monks surely pleased my mind. 
Here (i.e. on that occasion) I addressed the monks [thus]: ‘Indeed, monks, I eat a meal in one sitting’.”





1.	cattāro ime, bhikkhave, kālā sammā bhāviyamānā sammā anuparivattiyamānā anupubbena āsavānaṃ khayaṃ pāpenti. AN 4.147
These four times, monks, being developed correctly, thoroughly being done routinely, gradually lead to the destruction of the taints.
2.	ambho purisa, na tvaṃ addasa manussesu itthiṃ vā purisaṃ vā ābādhikaṃ dukkhitaṃ bāḷhagilānaṃ, sake muttakarīse palipannaṃ semānaṃ, aññehi vuṭṭhāpiyamānaṃ, aññehi saṃvesiyamānaṃ? (AN 3.36)
“Look here, man! Did you not see a woman or man among human beings ill, afflicted, extremely ill, lying down immersed in his own urine and excrement, being lifted up by others, being laid down by others?”
3.	evaṃ eso pañho pucchitabbo.  DN 16.11
This question should be asked thus.
4.	yo pana bhikkhu jānaṃ sappāṇakaṃ udakaṃ tiṇaṃ vā mattikaṃ vā siñceyya vā siñcāpeyya vā, pācittiyaṃ. VIN PAT PC 20
If any monk should pour out, or should cause to pour out, water on grass or clay, knowing that [it] [is] containing living beings, it is a case requiring confession.

 
